In this video, we're going to discuss Binary
I'd like to explain how binary works
I’d like to show you some tricks relating to binary and IP addresses
So for example, how to convert a dotted decimal IP Address
to a binary number and back again
Binary is a basic building block in networking and it's really important
that you understand how binary works, you'll encounter binary
over and over again throughout you networking career
So in this section, we'll cover the reasons why you should be learning binary
and I've already mentioned a few good reasons
I'd like to give you an overview of binary and explain the basics of binary
and then lastly I'd like to show you how to convert an IP Address to binary
and then translate it back again
This is very similar to translating from one language to another
so for example, translating English to French
but in this case, we're taking a dotted decimal IP address and
converting it to binary format and then converting it back again
So let's get started!
Binary is of great importance once again in networking
you're going to encounter binary when doing IP Subnetting
for example or when configuring Access Lists to permit or deny
certain IP addresses or certain subnets
You cannot be a good Network Engineer if you don't understand
IP addressing and subnetting and therefore a knowledge of binary is required
as you'll be using it again and again
As an example, you may have a subnet of 10.1.1.0/24
and you may need to subnet that again to 10.1.1.0/28
without a good understanding of binary, it will be very difficult
to do subnetting or to work with Access Control Lists which use inverse masks
so 0.0.0.255 is the inverse of 255.255.255.0
once again without a fundamental understanding of binary
it will be very difficult to do both subnetting and Access Lists
and various other tasks in networking
All computers function by using a system of switches that
can either be set on or set off
an off value is denoted as a 0 and on value is denoted as a 1
So binary is actually a really simple language all you have to understand
is that you have 2 options or 2 values and those values are either 0 or 1
Decimal, for instance, has values 0 to 9 but in binary it's always either 0 or
There are only those  two values that you need to understand
I just wish learning a foreign language was as simple as this language
which contains only two words or two values once again 0 or 1
As an example a 128 in decimal = 10000000 in other words 1 followed by 7 0s
in binary and I'm going to explain in a moment how I got to that value
but notice it's either 1s or 0s
These values will be used in combinations but essentially everything
in binary boils down to either a 0 or a 1
So to help you understand how binary let's use the following analogy
imagine a cable, that cable can either have current or not have current
So when there’s current on the cable that equates to a 1
when there’s no current that equates to 0
So single cable can have 1 of 2 states it can either have current
or not have current.When current is applied the value would be 1
and when no current is applied the value would be 0
So a single cable when there's no current = 0
and when there's current = 1
This cable can be in 1 or 2 states, it can either have current
or not have current and that gives us 2 combinations or 2 options
either 0 or 1, meaning no current or meaning current